### Subqueries in WHERE


##### 1. Find students who applied to CS.
sqlite> SELECT sID, sName FROM Student WHERE sID IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS');

sID  sName
---  -----
123  Amy  
345  Craig
987  Helen
876  Irene
543  Craig

*the query above is called sub-relation, we can reach the same result using below join-two-relation query, provided the sIDs are UNIQUE.*

sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT Student.sID, sName FROM Student, Apply WHERE Student.sID = Apply.sID AND major = 'CS';


##### 2. Find students who applied to CS but not EE.
sqlite> SELECT sID, sName FROM Student WHERE sID IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS') AND sID NOT IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'EE');

sID  sName
---  -----
987  Helen
876  Irene
543  Craig

*or use the ANY operator*
SELECT sID, sName FROM Student WHERE sID = ANY (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS') AND NOT sID = ANY (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'EE');


##### 3. Find the name and state of colleges that are in the same state.
sqlite> SELECT cName, state FROM College C1 WHERE EXISTS (SELECT * FROM COLLEGE C2 WHERE C1.state = C2.state AND C1.cName <> C2.cName);

cName     state
--------  -----
Stanford  CA   
Berkeley  CA   

*use EXISTS to check if the subquery is empty or not*

*In this nested query, C1 is in the outer query while C2 is in the inner query. Every college in C1 is checked against every college in C2, hence, the same college is checked against itself as well as others. If we don't specify C1.cName <> C2.cName, the query will return all colleges, because the query will always be able to find a match (itself) between C1 and C2.*


##### 4. Find the college with the largest enrollment.
sqlite> SELECT cName FROM College C1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM College C2 WHERE C2.enrollment > C1.enrollment);

cName   
-------- -
Berkeley

*the subquery method above will return ALL results that match the condition, not just one result. In another word, if two colleges have the exact same enrollment, it still meets the condition that no other college has more enrollment than these two colleges, hence the query will return both colleges. See Example 5 below for demonstration.*

*The same result can also be achieved using ALL or ANY operators. However, using ALL or ANY would only work if there is only one UNIQUE result. If two or more schools have the same number of the largest enrollment, the query would return NONE.*

**NOTE: SQLITE does NOT support ANY/ALL operators. ANY/ALL operators can always be replaced with EXISTS operator.**
SELECT cName FROM College C1 WHERE enrollment > ALL (SELECT enrollment FROM College C2 WHERE C1.cName <> C2.cName);
sSELECT cName FROM College C1 WHERE enrollment <= ANY (SELECT enrollment FROM College C2 WHERE C1.cName <> C2.cName);


##### 5. Find the student(s) with the highest GPA.
sqlite> SELECT sID, sName, GPA FROM Student S1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Student S2 WHERE S2.GPA > S1.GPA);

sID  sName  GPA
---  -----  ---
123  Amy    3.9
456  Doris  3.9
876  Irene  3.9
654  Amy    3.9

*or use the ALL operator*
SELECT sID, sName, GPA FROM Student WHERE GPA >= ALL (SELECT GPA FROM Student);


##### 6. Find all students not from the smallest HS.
sqlite> SELECT sID, sName, sizeHS FROM Student S1 WHERE EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Student S2 WHERE S2.sizeHS < S1.sizeHS);

sID  sName   SizeHS
---  ------  ------
123  Amy     1000  
234  Bob     1500  
345  Craig   500   
456  Doris   1000  
567  Edward  2000  
789  Gary    800   
987  Helen   800   
876  Irene   400   
765  Jay     1500  
654  Amy     1000  
543  Craig   2000  

*or use the ANY operator*
SELECT sID, sName, sizeHS FROM Student WHERE sizeHS > ANY (SELECT sizeHS FROM Student);

