### Aggregation


##### 1. Compute minumum GPA of all students.
sqlite> SELECT MIN(GPA) FROM Student;

MIN(GPA)
-------- -
2.9  


##### 2. Find the average GPA of students who applied to CS.
sqlite> SELECT AVG(GPA) FROM Student, Apply WHERE Student.sID = Apply.sID AND major = 'CS';

AVG(GPA)        
---------------- -
3.71428571428571

*by using the above method, the average GPA is actually skewed, as it counts the students as many times as they've applied to CS major (to different colleges). Use below subquery method to count each student only once*
sqlite> SELECT AVG(GPA) FROM Student WHERE sID IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS');

AVG(GPA)
-------- -
3.68    


##### 3. Find the number of colleges with enrollment above 15000.
sqlite> SELECT COUNT(cName) FROM College WHERE enrollment > 15000;

COUNT(cName)
------------ -
2    


##### 4. Find the number of students applied to Cornell.
sqlite> SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT sID) FROM Apply WHERE cName = 'Cornell';

COUNT(DISTINCT sID)
------------------- -
3   


##### 5. Find the students such that the number of other students with the same GPA = the number of other students from the same sizeHS.
sqlite> SELECT \* FROM Student S1 WHERE (SELECT COUNT(\*) FROM Student S2 WHERE S1.sID <> S2.sID AND S1.GPA = S2.GPA) = (SELECT COUNT(\*) FROM Student S2 WHERE S1.sID <> S2.sID AND S1.sizeHS = S2.sizeHS);

sID  sName   GPA  SizeHS
---  ------  ---  ------
345  Craig   3.5  500   
567  Edward  2.9  2000  
678  Fay     3.8  200   
789  Gary    3.4  800   
765  Jay     2.9  1500  
543  Craig   3.4  2000  


##### 6. Find the average GPA difference between CS major and non-CS major.
sqlite> SELECT CS.avgGPA - NonCS.avgGPA FROM (SELECT AVG(GPA) AS avgGPA FROM Student WHERE sID IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS')) AS CS, (SELECT AVG(GPA) AS avgGPA FROM Student WHERE sID NOT IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS')) AS NonCS;

CS.avgGPA - NonCS.avgGPA
------------------------ -
0.194285714285716    

*the same result can be achieved using the SELECT subquery method below*
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT (SELECT AVG(GPA) FROM Student WHERE sID IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS')) - (SELECT AVG(GPA) FROM Student WHERE sID NOT IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply WHERE major = 'CS')) AS d FROM Student;

d                
----------------- -
0.194285714285716


##### 7. Find number of applicants to each college.
sqlite> SELECT cName, COUNT(*) FROM Apply GROUP BY cName;

cName     COUNT(*)
--------  --------
Berkeley  3       
Cornell   6       
MIT       4       
Stanford  6   


##### 8. Find college enrollments by state.
sqlite> SELECT state, SUM(enrollment) FROM College GROUP BY state;

state  SUM(enrollment)
-----  ---------------
CA     51000          
MA     10000          
NY     21000   


##### 9. Find the minimum and maximum GPAs of applicants to each college and major.
sqlite> SELECT cName, major, MIN(GPA), MAX(GPA) FROM Student, Apply WHERE Student.sID = Apply.sID GROUP BY cName, major;

cName     major           MIN(GPA)  MAX(GPA)
--------  --------------  --------  --------
Berkeley  CS              3.7       3.9     
Berkeley  biology         3.6       3.6     
Cornell   CS              3.5       3.5     
Cornell   EE              3.5       3.9     
Cornell   bioengineering  3.5       3.5     
Cornell   history         2.9       2.9     
Cornell   psychology      2.9       2.9     
MIT       CS              3.4       3.4     
MIT       bioengineering  3.5       3.5     
MIT       biology         3.9       3.9     
MIT       marine biology  3.9       3.9     
Stanford  CS              3.7       3.9     
Stanford  EE              3.9       3.9     
Stanford  history         2.9       3.8    


##### 10. Find the number of colleges each student applied to.
sqlite> SELECT Student.sID, sName, COUNT(DISTINCT cName) FROM Apply, Student WHERE Apply.sID = Student.sID GROUP BY Student.sID;

sID  sName  COUNT(DISTINCT cName)
---  -----  ---------------------
123  Amy    3                    
234  Bob    1                    
345  Craig  2                    
543  Craig  1                    
678  Fay    1                    
765  Jay    2                    
876  Irene  2                    
987  Helen  2  

**NOTE that if the columns SELECTED contains more than one value for each GROUP, the query will present a random value from that column in the result. For example, if we included cName in the SELECT query, since the query is GROUPed BY sID and each sID has many cNames (each student applied to multiple colleges), the query will NOT be able to return all cNames for the sIDs.**


##### 11. Find the number of colleges each student applied to, including students that didn't apply to any colleges.
sqlite> SELECT Student.sID, sName, COUNT(DISTINCT cName) FROM Student, Apply WHERE Student.sID = Apply.sID GROUP BY Student.sID UNION SELECT Student.sID, sName, 0 FROM Student WHERE sID NOT IN (SELECT sID FROM Apply);

sID  sName   COUNT(DISTINCT cName)
---  ------  ---------------------
123  Amy     3                    
234  Bob     1                    
345  Craig   2                    
456  Doris   0                    
543  Craig   1                    
567  Edward  0                    
654  Amy     0                    
678  Fay     1                    
765  Jay     2                    
789  Gary    0                    
876  Irene   2                    
987  Helen   2     


##### 12. Find the colleges that have fewer than 5 applications.
sqlite> SELECT cName FROM Apply GROUP BY cName HAVING COUNT(*) < 5;

cName   
-------- -
Berkeley
MIT 

*can also achieve the same result without using GROUP BY/HAVING. GROUP BY/HAVING can always be replaced with other operations if needed.*
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT cName FROM Apply A1 WHERE (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Apply A2 WHERE A1.cName = A2.cName) < 5;


##### 13. Find the colleges that have fewer than 5 applicants.
sqlite> SELECT cName FROM Apply GROUP BY cName HAVING COUNT(DISTINCT sID) < 5;

cName   
-------- -
Berkeley
Cornell 
MIT 

