# SQL Movie-Rating Query Exercises


# Problem:
You've started a new movie-rating website, and you've been collecting data on reviewers' ratings of various movies. There's not much data yet, but you can still try out some interesting queries. Here's the schema:

*Movie ( mID, title, year, director )*
There is a movie with ID number mID, a title, a release year, and a director.

*Reviewer ( rID, name )*
The reviewer with ID number rID has a certain name.

*Rating ( rID, mID, stars, ratingDate )*
The reviewer rID gave the movie mID a number of stars rating (1-5) on a certain ratingDate.

Your queries will run over a small data set conforming to the schema. See the original data in '0.MovieRatingSchema.sql' file.


# Instructions:
Each problem asks you to write a query in SQL. To run your query against our back-end sample database using SQLite, click the "Submit" button. You will see a display of your query result and the expected result. If the results match, your query will be marked "correct". You may run as many queries as you like for each question.

**Important Notes:**
Your queries are executed using SQLite, so you must conform to the SQL constructs supported by SQLite.

Unless a specific result ordering is asked for, you can return the result rows in any order.

You are to translate the English into a SQL query that computes the desired result over all possible databases. All we actually check is that your query gets the right answer on the small sample database. Thus, even if your solution is marked as correct, it is possible that your query does not correctly reflect the problem at hand. (For example, if we ask for a complex condition that requires accessing all of the tables, but over our small data set in the end the condition is satisfied only by Star Wars, then the query "select title from Movie where title = 'Star Wars'" will be marked correct even though it doesn't reflect the actual question.) Circumventing the system in this fashion will get you a high score on the exercises, but it won't help you learn SQL. On the other hand, an incorrect attempt at a general solution is unlikely to produce the right answer, so you shouldn't be led astray by our checking system.

You may perform these exercises as many times as you like, so we strongly encourage you to keep working with them until you complete the exercises with full credit.


### Q1. Find the titles of all movies directed by Steven Spielberg.
sqlite> SELECT title FROM Movie WHERE director = 'Steven Spielberg';

title                  
----------------------- -
E.T.                   
Raiders of the Lost Ark


### Q2. Find all years that have a movie that received a rating of 4 or 5, and sort them in increasing order.
sqlite> SELECT year FROM Movie WHERE mID IN (SELECT mID FROM Rating WHERE stars >= 4) ORDER BY year;

year
---- -
1937
1939
1981
2009


### Q3. Find the titles of all movies that have no ratings.
sqlite> SELECT title FROM Movie WHERE mID NOT IN (SELECT mID FROM Rating);

title    
--------- -
Star Wars
Titanic  


### Q4. Some reviewers didn't provide a date with their rating. Find the names of all reviewers who have ratings with a NULL value for the date.
sqlite> SELECT name FROM Reviewer WHERE rID IN (SELECT rID FROM Rating WHERE ratingDate IS NULL);

name         
------------- -
Daniel Lewis 
Chris Jackson


### Q5. Write a query to return the ratings data in a more readable format: reviewer name, movie title, stars, and ratingDate. Also, sort the data, first by reviewer name, then by movie title, and lastly by number of stars.
sqlite> SELECT name, title, stars, ratingDate FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID) LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) ORDER BY name, title, stars;

name              title                    stars  ratingDate
----------------  -----------------------  -----  ----------
Ashley White      E.T.                     3      2011-01-02
Brittany Harris   Raiders of the Lost Ark  2      2011-01-30
Brittany Harris   Raiders of the Lost Ark  4      2011-01-12
Brittany Harris   The Sound of Music       2      2011-01-20
Chris Jackson     E.T.                     2      2011-01-22
Chris Jackson     Raiders of the Lost Ark  4                
Chris Jackson     The Sound of Music       3      2011-01-27
Daniel Lewis      Snow White               4                
Elizabeth Thomas  Avatar                   3      2011-01-15
Elizabeth Thomas  Snow White               5      2011-01-19
James Cameron     Avatar                   5      2011-01-20
Mike Anderson     Gone with the Wind       3      2011-01-09
Sarah Martinez    Gone with the Wind       2      2011-01-22
Sarah Martinez    Gone with the Wind       4      2011-01-27


### Q6. For all cases where the same reviewer rated the same movie twice and gave it a higher rating the second time, return the reviewer's name and the title of the movie.
sqlite> SELECT name, title FROM Rating R1, Rating R2 LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID) LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE R1.rID = R2.rID AND R1.mID = R2.mID AND R1.stars < R2.stars AND R1.ratingDate < R2.ratingDate;

name            title             
--------------  ------------------
Sarah Martinez  Gone with the Wind


### Q7. For each movie that has at least one rating, find the highest number of stars that movie received. Return the movie title and number of stars. Sort by movie title.
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT title, stars FROM Rating R1 LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Rating R2 WHERE R1.mID = R2.mID AND R2.stars > R1.stars) ORDER BY title;

title                    stars
-----------------------  -----
Avatar                   5    
E.T.                     3    
Gone with the Wind       4    
Raiders of the Lost Ark  4    
Snow White               5    
The Sound of Music       3   


### Q8. For each movie, return the title and the 'rating spread', that is, the difference between highest and lowest ratings given to that movie. Sort by rating spread from highest to lowest, then by movie title.
sqlite> SELECT title, (MAX(stars) - MIN(stars)) AS spread FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) GROUP BY mID ORDER BY spread DESC, title;

title                    spread
-----------------------  ------
Avatar                   2     
Gone with the Wind       2     
Raiders of the Lost Ark  2     
E.T.                     1     
Snow White               1     
The Sound of Music       1  


### Q9. Find the difference between the average rating of movies released before 1980 and the average rating of movies released after 1980. (Make sure to calculate the average rating for each movie, then the average of those averages for movies before 1980 and movies after. Don't just calculate the overall average rating before and after 1980.)
sqlite> SELECT AVG(Before.B) - AVG(After.A) AS d FROM (SELECT M.avg AS B FROM (SELECT AVG(stars) as avg, year FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) GROUP BY title) M WHERE M.year < 1980) Before, (SELECT M.avg AS A FROM (SELECT AVG(stars) as avg, year FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) GROUP BY title) M WHERE M.year > 1980) After;

d                 
------------------ -
0.0555555555555558


### Q10. Find the names of all reviewers who rated Gone with the Wind.
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT name FROM Reviewer LEFT JOIN Rating USING (rID) WHERE rID IN (SELECT rID FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE title = 'Gone with the Wind');

name          
-------------- -
Sarah Martinez
Mike Anderson 


### Q11. For any rating where the reviewer is the same as the director of the movie, return the reviewer name, movie title, and number of stars.
sqlite> SELECT name, title, stars FROM Reviewer LEFT JOIN Rating USING (rID) LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE name = director;

name           title   stars
-------------  ------  -----
James Cameron  Avatar  5  


### Q12. Return all reviewer names and movie names together in a single list, alphabetized. (Sorting by the first name of the reviewer and first word in the title is fine; no need for special processing on last names or removing "The".)
sqlite> SELECT name FROM Reviewer UNION SELECT title FROM Movie ORDER BY name;

name                   
----------------------- -
Ashley White           
Avatar                 
Brittany Harris        
Chris Jackson          
Daniel Lewis           
E.T.                   
Elizabeth Thomas       
Gone with the Wind     
James Cameron          
Mike Anderson          
Raiders of the Lost Ark
Sarah Martinez         
Snow White             
Star Wars              
The Sound of Music     
Titanic 


### Q13. Find the titles of all movies not reviewed by Chris Jackson.
sqlite> SELECT title FROM Movie WHERE mID NOT IN (SELECT DISTINCT mID FROM Rating WHERE rID IN (SELECT rID FROM Reviewer WHERE name = 'Chris Jackson'));

title             
------------------ -
Gone with the Wind
Star Wars         
Titanic           
Snow White        
Avatar 


### Q14. For all pairs of reviewers such that both reviewers gave a rating to the same movie, return the names of both reviewers. Eliminate duplicates, don't pair reviewers with themselves, and include each pair only once. For each pair, return the names in the pair in alphabetical order.
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT R1.name, R2.name FROM (SELECT * FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID)) R1 JOIN (SELECT * FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID)) R2 USING (mID) WHERE R1.name < R2.name ORDER BY R1.name;

name              name            
----------------  ----------------
Ashley White      Chris Jackson   
Brittany Harris   Chris Jackson   
Daniel Lewis      Elizabeth Thomas
Elizabeth Thomas  James Cameron   
Mike Anderson     Sarah Martinez 


### Q15. For each rating that is the lowest (fewest stars) currently in the database, return the reviewer name, movie title, and number of stars.
sqlite> SELECT name, title, stars FROM Rating R1 LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID) LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Rating R2 WHERE R2.stars < R1.stars);

name             title                    stars
---------------  -----------------------  -----
Sarah Martinez   Gone with the Wind       2    
Brittany Harris  The Sound of Music       2    
Brittany Harris  Raiders of the Lost Ark  2    
Chris Jackson    E.T.                     2 


### Q16. List movie titles and average ratings, from highest-rated to lowest-rated. If two or more movies have the same average rating, list them in alphabetical order.
sqlite> SELECT title, AVG(stars) AS avg FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) GROUP BY mID ORDER BY avg DESC, title;

title                    avg             
-----------------------  ----------------
Snow White               4.5             
Avatar                   4.0             
Raiders of the Lost Ark  3.33333333333333
Gone with the Wind       3.0             
E.T.                     2.5             
The Sound of Music       2.5    


### Q17. Find the names of all reviewers who have contributed three or more ratings.
sqlite> SELECT name FROM Rating LEFT JOIN Reviewer USING (rID) GROUP BY rID HAVING COUNT(*) >= 3;

name           
--------------- -
Brittany Harris
Chris Jackson 


### Q18. Some directors directed more than one movie. For all such directors, return the titles of all movies directed by them, along with the director name. Sort by director name, then movie title.
sqlite> SELECT title, director FROM Movie WHERE director IN (SELECT director FROM Movie GROUP BY director HAVING COUNT(title) > 1) ORDER BY director, title;

title                    director        
-----------------------  ----------------
Avatar                   James Cameron   
Titanic                  James Cameron   
E.T.                     Steven Spielberg
Raiders of the Lost Ark  Steven Spielberg


### Q19. Find the movie(s) with the highest average rating. Return the movie title(s) and average rating. 
sqlite> SELECT title, A1.avg FROM (SELECT * FROM (SELECT mID, AVG(stars) as avg FROM Rating GROUP BY mID)) A1 LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE NOT EXISTS(SELECT mID FROM (SELECT * FROM (SELECT mID, AVG(stars) as avg FROM Rating GROUP BY mID)) A2 WHERE A2.avg > A1.avg);

title       avg
----------  ---E
Snow White  4.5


### Q20. Find the movie(s) with the lowest average rating. Return the movie title(s) and average rating. 
sqlite> SELECT title, A1.avg FROM (SELECT * FROM (SELECT mID, AVG(stars) as avg FROM Rating GROUP BY mID)) A1 LEFT JOIN Movie USING (mID) WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT mID FROM (SELECT * FROM (SELECT mID, AVG(stars) as avg FROM Rating GROUP BY mID)) A2 WHERE A2.avg < A1.avg);

title               avg
------------------  ---
The Sound of Music  2.5
E.T.                2.5


### Q21. For each director, return the director's name together with the title(s) of the movie(s) they directed that received the highest rating among all of their movies, and the value of that rating. Ignore movies whose director is NULL.
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT director, title, stars FROM (SELECT * FROM Movie LEFT JOIN Rating USING (mID) WHERE director IS NOT NULL AND stars IS NOT NULL) L1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT director, title, stars FROM (SELECT * FROM Movie LEFT JOIN Rating USING (mID) WHERE director IS NOT NULL AND stars IS NOT NULL) L2 WHERE L2.director = L1.director AND L2.stars > L1.stars);

director          title                    stars
----------------  -----------------------  -----
Victor Fleming    Gone with the Wind       4    
Robert Wise       The Sound of Music       3    
James Cameron     Avatar                   5    
Steven Spielberg  Raiders of the Lost Ark  4   