### SQL Social-Network Query Exercises


##### Problem:
Students at your hometown high school have decided to organize their social network using databases. So far, they have collected information about sixteen students in four grades, 9-12. Here's the schema:

Highschooler ( ID, name, grade )
English: There is a high school student with unique ID and a given first name in a certain grade.

Friend ( ID1, ID2 )
English: The student with ID1 is friends with the student with ID2. Friendship is mutual, so if (123, 456) is in the Friend table, so is (456, 123).

Likes ( ID1, ID2 )
English: The student with ID1 likes the student with ID2. Liking someone is not necessarily mutual, so if (123, 456) is in the Likes table, there is no guarantee that (456, 123) is also present.

Your queries will run over a small data set conforming to the schema. See the original data in '1.SocialNetworkSchema.sql' file.

For your convenience, here is a graph showing the various connections between the students in our database. 9th graders are blue, 10th graders are green, 11th graders are yellow, and 12th graders are purple. Undirected black edges indicate friendships, and directed red edges indicate that one student likes another student.

See file '1.Social.png'


##### Instructions:
Each problem asks you to write a query in SQL. To run your query against our back-end sample database using SQLite, click the "Submit" button. You will see a display of your query result and the expected result. If the results match, your query will be marked "correct". You may run as many queries as you like for each question.


**Important Notes:**
Your queries are executed using SQLite, so you must conform to the SQL constructs supported by SQLite.

Unless a specific result ordering is asked for, you can return the result rows in any order.

You are to translate the English into a SQL query that computes the desired result over all possible databases. All we actually check is that your query gets the right answer on the small sample database. Thus, even if your solution is marked as correct, it is possible that your query does not correctly reflect the problem at hand. (For example, if we ask for a complex condition that requires accessing all of the tables, but over our small data set in the end the condition is satisfied only by Star Wars, then the query "select title from Movie where title = 'Star Wars'" will be marked correct even though it doesn't reflect the actual question.) Circumventing the system in this fashion will get you a high score on the exercises, but it won't help you learn SQL. On the other hand, an incorrect attempt at a general solution is unlikely to produce the right answer, so you shouldn't be led astray by our checking system.

You may perform these exercises as many times as you like, so we strongly encourage you to keep working with them until you complete the exercises with full credit.


##### Q1. Find the names of all students who are friends with someone named Gabriel.
sqlite> SELECT name FROM Highschooler WHERE ID IN (SELECT ID1 FROM Friend WHERE ID2 IN (SELECT ID FROM Highschooler WHERE name = 'Gabriel'));

name     
--------- -
Jordan   
Cassandra
Andrew   
Alexis   
Jessica  


##### Q2. For every student who likes someone 2 or more grades younger than themselves, return that student's name and grade, and the name and grade of the student they like.
sqlite> SELECT Like.name, Like.grade, Liked.name, Liked.grade FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Highschooler Like ON Likes.ID1 = Like.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler Liked ON Likes.ID2 = Liked.ID WHERE Like.grade - Liked.grade >= 2;

name  grade  name   grade
----  -----  -----  -----
John  12     Haley  10  


##### Q3. For every pair of students who both like each other, return the name and grade of both students. Include each pair only once, with the two names in alphabetical order.
sqlite> SELECT Like_name, Like_grade, Liked_name, Liked_grade FROM (SELECT * FROM (SELECT Like.name AS Like_name, Like.grade AS Like_grade, Liked.name AS Liked_name, Liked.grade AS Liked_grade FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Highschooler Like ON Likes.ID1 = Like.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler Liked ON Likes.ID2 = Liked.ID) L1, (SELECT Like.name AS Like_name, Like.grade AS Like_grade, Liked.name AS Liked_name, Liked.grade AS Liked_grade FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Highschooler Like ON Likes.ID1 = Like.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler Liked ON Likes.ID2 = Liked.ID) L2 WHERE L1.Like_name = L2.Liked_name AND L1.Liked_name = L2.Like_name) L3 WHERE L3.Like_name < L3.Liked_name ORDER BY L3.Like_name;

Like_name  Like_grade  Liked_name  Liked_grade
---------  ----------  ----------  -----------
Cassandra  9           Gabriel     9          
Jessica    11          Kyle        12  


##### Q4. Find all students who do not appear in the Likes table (as a student who likes or is liked) and return their names and grades. Sort by grade, then by name within each grade.
sqlite> SELECT name, grade FROM Highschooler WHERE ID NOT IN (SELECT ID1 FROM Likes) AND ID NOT IN (SELECT ID2 FROM Likes) ORDER BY grade, name;

name     grade
-------  -----
Jordan   9    
Tiffany  9    
Logan    12   


##### Q5. For every situation where student A likes student B, but we have no information about whom B likes (that is, B does not appear as an ID1 in the Likes table), return A and B's names and grades.
sqlite> SELECT Like.name, Like.grade, Liked.name, Liked.grade FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Highschooler Like ON Likes.ID1 = Like.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler Liked ON Likes.ID2 = Liked.ID WHERE ID2 NOT IN (SELECT ID1 FROM Likes);

name      grade  name    grade
--------  -----  ------  -----
Alexis    11     Kris    10   
Brittany  10     Kris    10   
Austin    11     Jordan  12   
John      12     Haley   10  


##### Q6. Find names and grades of students who only have friends in the same grade. Return the result sorted by grade, then by name within each grade.
sqlite> SELECT DISTINCT name, grade FROM (SELECT * FROM Friend Left JOIN Highschooler F1 ON Friend.ID1 = F1.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler F2 ON Friend.ID2 = F2.ID) WHERE ID NOT IN (SELECT F1.ID FROM Friend Left JOIN Highschooler F1 ON Friend.ID1 = F1.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler F2 ON Friend.ID2 = F2.ID WHERE F1.grade <> F2.grade) ORDER BY grade, name;

name      grade
--------  -----
Jordan    9    
Brittany  10   
Haley     10   
Kris      10   
Gabriel   11   
John      12   
Logan     12   


##### Q7. For each student A who likes a student B where the two are not friends, find if they have a friend C in common (who can introduce them!). For all such trios, return the name and grade of A, B, and C.
sqlite> SELECT T1.name, T1.grade, T2.name, T2.grade, T3.name, T3.grade FROM (SELECT L1.ID1 AS LI1, L1.ID2 AS LI2, F1.ID2 AS LI3 FROM (SELECT * FROM Likes WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Friend WHERE Likes.ID1 = Friend.ID1 AND Likes.ID2 = Friend.ID2)) L1 LEFT JOIN Friend F1 ON (L1.ID1 = F1.ID1) LEFT JOIN Friend F2 ON (L1.ID2 = F2.ID1) WHERE F1.ID2 = F2.ID2) T LEFT JOIN Highschooler T1 ON T.LI1 = T1.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler T2 ON T.LI2 = T2.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler T3 ON T.LI3 = T3.ID;

name    grade  name       grade  name     grade
------  -----  ---------  -----  -------  -----
Andrew  10     Cassandra  9      Gabriel  9    
Austin  11     Jordan     12     Andrew   10   
Austin  11     Jordan     12     Kyle     12 


##### Q8. Find the difference between the number of students in the school and the number of different first names.
sqlite> SELECT COUNT(*) - COUNT(DISTINCT(name)) FROM Highschooler;

COUNT(*) - COUNT(DISTINCT(name))
-------------------------------- -
2     


##### Q9. Find the name and grade of all students who are liked by more than one other student.
sqlite> SELECT Liked.name, Liked.grade FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Highschooler Like ON Likes.ID1 = Like.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler Liked ON Likes.ID2 = Liked.ID GROUP BY Liked.Name HAVING COUNT(Like.name) > 1;

name       grade
---------  -----
Cassandra  9    
Kris       10  


##### Q10. For every situation where student A likes student B, but student B likes a different student C, return the names and grades of A, B, and C.
sqlite> SELECT T1.name, T1.grade, T2.name, T2.grade, T3.name, T3.grade FROM (SELECT Likes.ID1 AS LI1, Likes.ID2 AS LI2, L1.ID2 AS LI3 FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Likes L1 ON (Likes.ID2 = L1.ID1) WHERE Likes.ID1 <> L1.ID2 AND L1.ID1 IS NOT NULL) T LEFT JOIN Highschooler T1 ON T.LI1 = T1.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler T2 ON T.LI2 = T2.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler T3 ON T.LI3 = T3.ID;

name     grade  name       grade  name     grade
-------  -----  ---------  -----  -------  -----
Andrew   10     Cassandra  9      Gabriel  9    
Gabriel  11     Alexis     11     Kris     10   


##### Q11. Find those students for whom all of their friends are in different grades from themselves. Return the students' names and grades.
sqlite> SELECT name, grade FROM Highschooler WHERE ID NOT IN (SELECT F1.ID FROM Friend LEFT JOIN Highschooler F1 ON Friend.ID1 = F1.ID LEFT JOIN Highschooler F2 ON Friend.ID2 = F2.ID WHERE F1.grade = F2.grade);

name    grade
------  -----
Austin  11 


##### Q12. What is the average number of friends per student? (Your result should be just one number.)
sqlite> SELECT AVG(CF) FROM (SELECT COUNT(ID2) AS CF FROM Friend GROUP BY ID1);

AVG(CF)
------- -
2.5  


##### Q13. Find the number of students who are either friends with Cassandra or are friends of friends of Cassandra. Do not count Cassandra, even though technically she is a friend of a friend.
sqlite> SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT F1.ID2) + COUNT(DISTINCT F2.ID2) FROM Friend F1 LEFT JOIN Friend F2 ON F1.ID2 = F2.ID1 WHERE F1.ID1 = (SELECT ID FROM Highschooler WHERE name = 'Cassandra') AND F1.ID2 <> (SELECT ID FROM Highschooler WHERE name = 'Cassandra') AND F2.ID2 <> (SELECT ID FROM Highschooler WHERE name = 'Cassandra');

COUNT(DISTINCT F1.ID2) + COUNT(DISTINCT F2.ID2)
----------------------------------------------- -
7 


##### Q14. Find the name and grade of the student(s) with the greatest number of friends.
sqlite> SELECT name, grade FROM (SELECT ID1 FROM Friend GROUP BY ID1 HAVING COUNT(ID2) = (SELECT MAX(NUM) FROM (SELECT COUNT(ID2) AS NUM FROM Friend GROUP BY ID1))) F1 LEFT JOIN Highschooler H1 ON F1.ID1 = H1.ID;
 
name    grade
------  -----
Alexis  11   
Andrew  10   

