# SQL Social-Network Modification Exercises


# Problem:
Students at your hometown high school have decided to organize their social network using databases. So far, they have collected information about sixteen students in four grades, 9-12. Here's the schema:

Highschooler ( ID, name, grade )
English: There is a high school student with unique ID and a given first name in a certain grade.

Friend ( ID1, ID2 )
English: The student with ID1 is friends with the student with ID2. Friendship is mutual, so if (123, 456) is in the Friend table, so is (456, 123).

Likes ( ID1, ID2 )
English: The student with ID1 likes the student with ID2. Liking someone is not necessarily mutual, so if (123, 456) is in the Likes table, there is no guarantee that (456, 123) is also present.

Your modifications will run over a small data set conforming to the schema. See the original data in '1.SocialNetworkSchema.sql' file.

For your convenience, here is a graph showing the various connections between the people in our database. 9th graders are blue, 10th graders are green, 11th graders are yellow, and 12th graders are purple. Undirected black edges indicate friendships, and directed red edges indicate that one person likes another person.

See file '1.Social.png'


# Instructions: 
You are to write each of the following data modification commands using SQL. Our back-end runs each modification using SQLite on the original state of the sample database. It then performs a query over the modified database to check whether your command made the correct modification, and restores the database to its original state. 

You may perform these exercises as many times as you like, so we strongly encourage you to keep working with them until you complete the exercises with full credit.


### Q1. It's time for the seniors to graduate. Remove all 12th graders from Highschooler.
sqlite> DELETE FROM Highschooler WHERE grade = 12;


### Q2. If two students A and B are friends, and A likes B but not vice-versa, remove the Likes tuple.
sqlite> DELETE FROM Likes WHERE Likes.ID1 IN (SELECT Likes.ID1 FROM Likes LEFT JOIN Friend F1 ON Likes.ID1 = F1.ID1 WHERE Likes.ID2 = F1.ID2 AND Likes.ID1 NOT IN (SELECT L1.ID1 FROM Likes L1, Likes L2 WHERE L1.ID1 = L2.ID2 AND L1.ID2 = L2.ID1))


### Q3. For all cases where A is friends with B, and B is friends with C, add a new friendship for the pair A and C. Do not add duplicate friendships, friendships that already exist, or friendships with oneself. 
sqlite> INSERT INTO Friend SELECT * FROM (SELECT DISTINCT F1.ID1 AS ID1, F2.ID2 AS ID2 FROM Friend F1 LEFT JOIN Friend F2 WHERE F1.ID2 = F2.ID1 AND F1.ID1 <> F2.ID2) L1 WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * FROM Friend WHERE L1.ID1 = Friend.ID1 AND L1.ID2 = Friend.ID2)